I hope you're beginning to catch on that your hope as a sinner is based upon God's love for his name.
This is not widely taught.
It's not widely understood.
It's just ignored.
This massive biblical foundation for the gospel.
Generally, we simply start with John 3 16 for God so loved the world that he sent his own son that
anybody who believes in Him might not perish but have eternal life.
And we don't go beneath that and say, why would God do that?
How can God do that?
How can He just forgive sinners?
Just boom, like that.
And we don't move down a level to His great name's sake.
I think it's easy to assume we know why God saves.
Many of us have heard John 3 16 our entire lives.
But what John Piper does in this seminar is slow us down and ask, but why did God save us in the first place?
I'm Dan Kruver.
In this episode of Light and Truth, John Piper takes us beneath the surface of John 3 16 to show that the foundation of our salvation is God's passion for His own name.
The seminar was originally delivered at Bethlehem Baptist Church on Wednesday evening, November 13, 1991.
What I'd like to do to begin is read a passage really just a verse from Ezekiel chapter 20.
It's a verse that I wrote down on a little piece of paper that I've been carrying around with me now for a couple of days because
It is the very heart of what I want to teach tonight from this chapter and I think the heart of the gospel or the foundation of the gospel anyway and a tremendous encouragement to me.
And let me read it in my goal for tonight is to be sort of repetitive and get one simple truth across, namely this verse.
that God's zeal for his name or his fame is the foundation of your hope as a sinner.
Because I think if you can add that to your storehouse of biblical insight and knowledge, you'll have another piece of artillery with which to defeat the lies and the attacks of the devil.
So here's a verse that has ministered to me so significantly, and I hope we'll
do so to you and then we'll pray and jump into the questions.
Ezekiel 2044, God speaking, you shall know that I am the Lord when I deal with you for my namesake, not according to your evil ways, nor according to your corrupt doings, O house of Israel, says the Lord.
You shall know that I am the Lord when I deal with you according to or for the sake of my name and not according to your evil ways."
So God had in front of him two ways to treat his people.
He could treat them according to their evil ways or he could treat them for his namesake.
Those are the two options set up in this verse.
And he said, you'll know that I'm the Lord.
when I deal with you for my namesake and not according to your evil ways.
So when I pray now on the basis of this verse, I have not only the mercy of God in general to plead over against my sins, I have the name of God to plead.
And when you plead the name of God, that's what this lesson is all about tonight,
you plead what he puts most story in.
And so there is a tremendous argument that you can make with God.
Spurgeon preached a great sermon one time about arguing with God.
He said, we should be like lawyers when we come before God.
Humble lawyers, but lawyers who make a case with God for why he should grant us the blessings we ask for.
And so I want to stick into your lawyer's portfolio tonight an argument that God can't resist.
Namely his name.
You shall know that I am the Lord when I deal with you Bethlehem or John for my namesake and not according to your evil ways.
There is a way to be saved even though we have evil ways, and that is to bank on the name of God.
Let's pray.
Father, I pray that far more than a mere intellectual grasp of this great truth tonight, though I ask for that, I ask for a profound
spiritual appropriation in the very depths of our emotions that you love your name above all things, that you want to make a name for yourself and be famous in the world and that your passion to become famous and to preserve the glory and the honor and integrity of your name is paramount in your goals.
And therefore, if we can kick in with that goal, if we can hide ourselves in that goal, if we can somehow clamp on to that goal, we are home, we are with you, and we are on the winning side.
We will not be treated according to our evil ways anymore.
We will be justified, and we will be glorified.
I just pray earnestly that this take hold of us tonight, Father, that your great
Awesome, incomprehensible, energetic zeal for your name would become the foundation of our hope.
In Jesus' name is name, I pray.
Amen.
Now, let's turn to the questions on chapter four.
And I'm gonna move through these one at a time and make comments on them
See, if you have questions about them and you've already heard the sum of the matter in my devotional thought and in my prayer, but we're just going to say it again and again and look at it from different angles and with different texts.
And hopefully by the time we're done, it'll be part of you.
For many of you, it already is part of you.
And I am thrilled about that.
Question number one.
Why is this chapter called the pleasure of God in his fame rather than the pleasure of God in his name?
Because I fully intended to use the word name until I thought more about it and decided that I could make it more clear that it's a mission chapter as well as a theological chapter.
if I used fame, and lo and behold, as I studied the meaning of the name of God in the Old Testament especially, it came clear that it not only was kind of a summary way of referring to his character, like if some, when you say that you do something for God's namesake, he leads us in paths of righteousness for his namesake.
He means that he wants his character to be evidenced in our path of righteousness.
But you can also hear another angle on it when he says things like that.
Namely, the name of God is the character of God known.
It's the reputation of God.
When you do something, or when you say, that man has a good name in the community.
What does that mean?
You don't mean people like the name Smith.
Oh, I just like Smith.
That's a great name.
That's not what you mean.
You mean, his reputation is good because his character's good.
He has a character that's good and people know about the character therefore his reputation is good and you sum that all up with name, good name.
And I think throughout the Bible,
more often than not when God's name is talked about it has that public reputation idea to it.
And so I wanted to get that across.
This is a chapter about God's reputation.
God's love for his reputation, his pleasure in his reputation and therefore I chose the word fame instead of name and we'll see some biblical reasons
Besides that meaning of the word name as we move on.
God loves his fame.
He wants to be popular.
He wants to be well known.
He wants to be universally acclaimed.
I have a poster on my study door at home.
Declare his glory among the nations from Psalm 96.
Why would he command us to do that?
It's because he has such a passion for his glory to be known among the nations.
God is far more zealous about world missions than any of us is.
And when you get on his side in that regard, he really kicks in with support.
And Satan, who hates the name of God, kicks in with opposition.
Any comment or question?
Number two, why is the first phrase of the Lord's prayer, hallowed be thy name, a missionary
prayer.
Now it might be obvious to you from what I've just said but I don't know how many years it was that I prayed the Lord's prayer without realizing that it was a request.
I had always, in fact I heard Tim Warner say this at the prayer concert Friday night and I could put a meaning on his words that would be accurate but
It troubles me when people take the first three statements of the Lord's Prayer and say, that's worship.
How would be thy name thy kingdom come thy will be done?
And then comes the help me requests.
Give us this day our daily bread, forgive us our sins.
Lead us not into temptation, deliver us from evil.
That's grammatically, that doesn't work.
Every single one of the
statements in the Lord's prayer is an imperative.
Asking God to do something.
Let your name be hallowed is the literal translation.
Let please, you're looking up to God and you're asking him to do something.
Let your name be hallowed.
Let your kingdom come.
Let your will be done on earth as it is in heaven.
Let me have enough food.
Take away my sins.
Guard me from Satan.
They're all in the same grammatical category of request.
Now, if you think about that then and go back up to hallowed be your name, this is a tremendous way to structure your prayer life and to begin your prayers.
When you pray, hallowed be thy name, you are asking God to do something, namely, cause your fame
your name, your reputation to spread, cause me, my family, my church, I generally pray in concentric circles like that, cause me, Noel and Carson and Benjamin Abraham and Barnumus and the elders and the staff at Bethlehem and all the people at Bethlehem and this city and this state and the BGC and all the evangelical movement and the whole world that names you and those that don't hallow your name.
I don't always get that far, but
If I were to finish it all, that would be the way I would pray.
We want your name to be known, loved, cherished, honored, praised.
I heard Russ pray and sort of like that when we began tonight.
He was using those kinds of words about the name of God.
Hallowed in the Hebrew is sanctified.
In the Greek it's sanctified.
It means set apart, it's holy.
like the gold is set apart in Fort Knox.
Big fences around it because it's valuable.
You set aside God's name like gold and silver.
You put a big fence around it, you might say, because you don't want the water in the fountain dirtied value.
Cause people to value your name.
Cause people to hear, to love, to cherish, respect, honor, praise.
So it is a missionary prayer right off the bat.
If I get a chance to write another book, which I hope I do in the next year or two, it's going to be Lord willing, the supremacy of God in missions as a follow up to the supremacy of God in preaching.
And you can believe that right near the front of that book is going to be a chapter on Halloween be thy name.
That is our calling.
That's our goal in life.
That's the goal of foreign missions.
That's the goal of prayer.
That's the goal of preaching.
That's the goal of small groups.
It's everything.
Hallowed be your name.
So I commend it to you.
When you get up in the morning and you start to pray and you don't know what to pray and you feel sort of dead inside, just go ahead and unpack the Lord's prayer.
I do it all the time.
Unpack it phrase by phrase.
When people of Israel rejected God from being king over them and asked to have a human king like all the other nations, it was a great wickedness according to 1217, 1 Samuel.
Yet God responds in amazingly hope-filled way.
This is the situation the people have asked for a king to be like the other nations and this is a bad thing to do is a great wickedness and now the people are afraid that God's gonna zap them and reject them because they've seen grievously by rejecting him and choosing a king for themselves it seems and here's what happened.
All the people said to Samuel, pray for your servants to the Lord your God, you know even not die.
for we have added to all our sins this evil to ask for ourselves the king."
So they admit what they've done.
It's wrong.
Samuel said to the people, fear not, you have done all this evil.
Yet do not turn aside from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with all your heart.
Do not turn aside after vain things, which will not profit or save, for they are vain, for the Lord will not cast away his people, for his great namesake,
because it has pleased the Lord to make you a people for himself.
Now, back to the question.
In the middle of the question three, he says, fear not, you have done all this evil, the Lord will not cast away his people.
What reason is given for why God will not destroy his people even though they have done such a great wickedness?
What reason is given for why God will not destroy them?
And the reason is given right here.
for the Lord will not cast away his people for his great namesake.
So the reason that he will not destroy them even though they have sinned is for his sake and not for their sake, their value.
It's the value of his name that undergirds the mercy
that he gives to his people to show them that he's not going to cast them away.
To me, this text, I come back to it again and again, is one of the most wonderful Old Testament gospel texts that there is.
And what I mean by calling it a gospel text is what you see right here in this connection.
Fear not, you have done all this evil.
Now that connection right there is gospel.
Fear not you have done all this evil.
The opposite of gospel would be fear for you have done all this evil.
And gospel says fear not.
You have done all this evil.
In order to create good news, you do not have to say, I haven't done very much evil.
I'm not so bad.
I'm as good as the next guy.
That does not create gospel.
That creates relative amounts of fear.
Nobody goes to bed with a peaceful conscience saying, I think I'm just as good as the next guy, because they know good and well.
They're not as good as they ought to have been.
It'll never work as gospel to say,
fear not, you haven't really done very much evil.
Gospel is fear not, you have done all this evil.
And then you're confronted with a massive justice problem.
That's just not just, that's not just any judge in downtown Minneapolis at the courthouse who gets a vicious criminal in front of him and says,
You have done all this evil.
But fear not, I'm going to let you go.
We would bounce him.
We would get him out of there fast as we could.
And so we have to figure out now, all right, this is good news.
Fear not, you have done all this evil.
But what's the foundation of it?
What keeps God from being unjust in this?
And I think that's what this phrase is all about.
for his great namesake.
If you ask, well, for whose sake or on what possible basis are you saying fear not and letting these people live in view of their tremendous rebellion against you?
And his answer is, well, it's not for their sake because they committed all this great evil.
It's for my namesake.
I hope you're beginning to catch on
that your hope as a sinner is based upon God's love for his name.
This is not widely taught.
It's not widely understood.
It's just ignored.
This massive biblical foundation for the gospel.
Generally, we simply start with John 3, 16, for God so loved the world that he sent his own son that anybody who believes in him might not perish, but have eternal life.
And we don't go beneath that and say,
Why would God do that?
How can God do that?
How can He just forgive sinners?
Just boom, like that.
And we don't move down a level to His great name's sake.
Now let's keep going, because question number four just relates to the same text.
According to 1 Samuel 12, 22, which starts right there, why is it that the name of God
is at stake in the casting away of the people of Israel.
That is, how does his commitment to his name produce a commitment to this people?
We need to understand that because it's not readily obvious why his love for his name might not cause him to smash those people for his name's sake.
I mean, they've sinned and trampled his name in the dirt by rejecting him.
He said, okay, for my name's sake, boom, you're gone.
You're done for it.
And if you just keep reading, you see the connection.
The Lord will not cast away his people, that is, fear not, for his great name's sake.
And then here comes the because.
We're going a step deeper here now because it has pleased the Lord to make you a people for himself.
I think I said it wrong when I said we're going to step deeper.
That's not quite right.
In fact, if I were to put it in terms of, I think one of my questions has to do with that.
Yeah, that's exactly question number five.
But let me, before I get at that, there's, here's the connection.
He loves his name and he has made them a people for himself and therefore his name is at stake in whether they survive.
and whether they prosper, whether they make it to glory.
Let me try to get at that further with question number five.
Think about God's allegiance to his name and his free act of choosing Israel for himself.
This is election and making the covenant with them.
That's what God did with Abraham.
He went to, he went to Ur of the Childies and he freely and unconditionally chose
Abraham.
He chooses Abraham, he chooses the people of Israel, and he somehow then connects his name with those people.
What is God most deeply committed to, his covenant of election or his name?
This is really important because there are a lot of Old Testament scholars who define the righteousness of God
as his allegiance to his covenant.
So God has made a covenant with his people, Israel, and through the blood of Christ with the church, and his keeping covenant, his not breaking covenant, his keeping promises and covenant, is his righteousness.
And I try to argue in my book, The Justification of God,
that that is an expression of his righteousness, but the root of his righteousness is beneath his commitment to the covenant.
Because you have to ask, why did God first choose Abraham, Israel?
Why did he choose you?
And what's the root commitment in his allegiance to you?
And I think that's contained right here in this verse.
It pleased the Lord, there's this pleasure, it pleased the Lord,
to make you a people for himself.
Not anybody in here who's born of God should be able to say, it pleased God to make me his child.
It pleased God to choose me for himself.
It pleased God to open my eyes.
It pleased God to shine in my heart with the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ and irresistibly draw me to his attractiveness by causing me to love his perfections.
It pleased God to lift me out of my family and my brother still won't open his eyes.
It should cause us to be stunned and awed at God's
goodness in opening me to believe than you to believe.
So he did that.
It pleased the Lord to make you a people for himself.
And now when you are threatened, something is at stake in God more than just his commitment to you.
What's at stake is his name.
That's what's implied here.
For his namesake, he won't cast you away because he made you a people for himself.
So evidently, here's the way I would, maybe I can draw it.
There are levels in God's commitments, and they're all rooted in a deep, most fundamental root commitment.
And that tap root, I think, is God's love for his
name.
That's the tap root.
You can't go lower in the being of God than that.
God loves being God.
Thank you for listening to this episode of Light and Truth, where we are committed to providing God-centered preaching to help you see Christ clearly and treasure Him truly.
I'm your host, Dan Kruver.
On our next episode, John Piper concludes our two-part series for God's namesake with a teaching titled, Why God Seeks Your Joy.
I hope you'll join us.
For more resources, visit desiringgod.org.